Add Java 11 blog post (#794)
debezium/debezium.github.io: _posts/2022-04-22-switch-to-java-11.adoc

---
layout: post
title:  Switching to Java 11/17
date:   2022-04-22 12:00:00 +0100
tags: [ community, news ]
author: vjuranek
---

As you probably noticed, we have started work on Debezium 2.0.
One of https://issues.redhat.com/browse/DBZ-3899[the planned changes] for the 2.0 release is https://issues.redhat.com/browse/DBZ-4949[to switch to Java 11 as a baseline].
While some Java implementations still supports Java 8 
(e.g. OpenJDK will be https://access.redhat.com/articles/1299013[supported by Red Hat] till 2026), 

> free Oracle JDK 8 already https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/java-se-support-roadmap.html[has reached end of life]. 

Reviewer: I'd avoid mentioning specific JDK distributions and frame it more generically. Another angle to discuss would be the New Relic [eco-system report](https://newrelic.com/resources/report/2022-state-of-java-ecosystem) which shows that more users are on 11 than on 8 by now, i.e. also we consider it to be about time for moving on.

Reviewer: The ability to emit JFR events is another strong motivator for moving the baseline to 11. While open-source JFR has been backported to 1.8, not all distributions contain it, and it'd require a specific 1.8 micro as a baseline, which is cumbersome.

So it's time to start thinking about using a more recent JDK, and the new major Debezium release is a natural milestone when to do the switch.

+++<!-- more -->+++

> Since early releases of Debezium 2.0, hopefully from the very first one `Alpha1`, Debezium bits will be compiled to Java 11 byte code.

Reviewer: It's a matter of fact as of Alpha1, so the "hopefully" can be removed.

Therefore, Java 11 will be required to run Debezium in the next major update.
Also, if you use any of the Debezium bits in your project, you will have to switch to Java 11.

But wait, what does Java 11/17 in the title mean?
Is it there just to scare you or we are going to actually switch to Java 17?

<dramatic pause here>

No, we don't want to scare you.
We are actually planning to switch to Java 17, but only for the test suite.

> This will allow us to use more recent Java features in the tests, while users still can stay on Java 11.

Reviewer: You could dive a bit into the details here, e.g. text blocks for JSON, or record types, etc.

Author: done

== Implementation

> Setting different byte code level for code and tests is pretty easy with Maven, 

Reviewer: Worth mentioning here that we use the "release" option rather than the legacy "source" and "target" options (see https://www.morling.dev/blog/bytebuffer-and-the-dreaded-nosuchmethoderror/ for the details).

you just need to set following system properties:

[source, xml]
----
<maven.compiler.release>11</maven.compiler.release>
<maven.compiler.testRelease>17</maven.compiler.testRelease>
----

> After switching to Java 11, checkstyle plugin and impsort plugin (plugin which takes care about proper order of imports) started to fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After switching to Java 11, the [Maven Checkstyle plug-in](https://maven.apache.org/plugins/maven-checkstyle-plugin/) and the [ImpSort plug-in](https://code.revelc.net/impsort-maven-plugin/) (a plug-in which takes care of proper import ordering) started to fail.
```

However, bumping their versions to the latest releases has solved all the issues.

This was the easy part.

> The most difficult part was the Cassandra connector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most difficult part was the Debezium [connector for Apache Cassandra](https://debezium.io/documentation/reference/stable/connectors/cassandra.html).
```

=== Cassandra connector

> Cassandra connector now provides support for Cassandra 3 as well as for Cassandra 4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Cassandra connector now provides support for Cassandra 3 as well as for Cassandra 4.
```

Cassandra 4 https://cassandra.apache.org/doc/4.0/cassandra/new/java11.html[works with Java 11], 
but running Cassandra 3 with Java 11 is not possible (or at least requires some hacking).

> Current test implementation doesn't run Cassandra in a container as we do in tests for other DB connectors, but runs Cassandra in embedded mode.

Reviewer: The tense is off a bit, this should be past:

```suggestion
The existing test implementation for this connector didn't run Cassandra in a container as we do it in tests for all other DB connectors, but instead runs Cassandra in embedded mode, i.e. within the same JVM and process as the tests themselves.
```

> Therefore if you want to run the tests with Java 11 (or 17), tests for Cassandra 3 module would fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore if you wanted to run the tests with Java 11 (or 17), tests for the Cassandra 3 connector module would fail.
```

> Obvious solution is to run Cassandra in a container with Java 8.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The obvious solution is to run Cassandra in a container with Java 8.
```

This sounds good, but this approach has one pitfall.
The Cassandra connector needs access to Cassandra log files as it reads the dedicated log file to obtain CDC events, so the tests need to access Cassandra files in the container.

> This can be solved quite easily using a temporary directory, .one in e.g `target`, giving access to all users and moutable within the container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be solved quite easily using a temporary directory, for instance within the `target` directory, and mount it as a volume into the container running Cassandra.
```

Cassandra running in the container can later on use this mounted volume for storing its data.
The real issue starts when you try to do the cleanup after the tests.

> As Cassandra runs under dedicated user `cassandra` in the container, which is very likely not present on the test machine (or with different UID/GID), 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As Cassandra runs  in the container under a dedicated user named`cassandra`, which is very likely not present on the test machine (or with a different UID/GID), 
```

cleanup fails when it tries to delete the temporary directory with Cassandra files.

> These files were created by a different user with insufficient rights for other users to delete them.

Reviewer: I don't quite get the problem yet. The log files are created by the `cassandra` user within the container, right? So why is it that user cannot delete the files then?

Author: Files were created by `cassandra` user withing the containers. But the directory where they were create is bind mount from temporary dir created by test in `target` directory, so these files are not in Docker FS overlay, but directly in project `target` directory (as tests need the access to the cassadra log files). And user running the tests typically don't have sufficient right to delete files created by different user. Is it more clear now?

I tried to explain it more also in the text.

Trying to delete them from Cassandra's container on Cassandra exit in some wrapper script turned out to be quite cumbersome and not very reliable.
The most promising solution proved to involve starting a second container with the same `cassandra` user with access to the mounted volume and cleaning up the files after the first Cassandra container had already stopped.

We considered two option for running containers:

* https://dmp.fabric8.io/[Fabric8 Docker Maven plugin]
* https://www.testcontainers.org/[Testcontainers]

We use the Fabric8 plugin in the rest of the project, which suggests to use it also in this case to have uniformity across the project.

> On the other hand, using testcontainers would make tests more convenient for the developers (who actually use tests after all!),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, using Testcontainers would make tests more convenient for the developers (who actually use tests after all!),
```

as it allows to run the tests directly from IDE without starting the container manually.
In the end, the decision was driven by the fact that running a cleanup container is not possible with the Fabric8 plugin.
Maven doesn't allow to execute different configurations in the same phase 

> and therefore it's not possible to stop the Cassandra container in the `post-integration-test` phase and at the same time run cleanup container in this phase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and therefore it's not possible to stop the Cassandra container in the `post-integration-test` phase and at the same time run a cleanup container in this phase.
```

Testcontainers allow starting and stopping containers programmatically when needed, 

> allows defining the images directly in code so we don't need any additional `Dockerfile`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
letting us define the images directly in the test code so we don't need any additional `Dockerfile`
```

, and cleaning up the container is just an implementation detail hidden in the test itself.

> Having the ability to run the tests directly from the IDE is a nice benefit on top of these things.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having the ability to run the tests directly from an IDE, without having to manually start and stop a container with the database, is a nice benefit on top of these things.
```

> The only tricky thing when using testcontainers was that when we tried to remove the files using Docker `cmd` command,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only tricky thing when using Testcontainers was that when we tried to remove the log files using Docker's `cmd` command,
```

> testcontainers randomly failed, stating that the container didn't start in spite of the fact that all Cassandra files were actually deleted.
> The container probably ran so fast that it finished before testcontainers noticed it.
> Finally, we solved it by adding a short `sleep` in the container and executing an additional command in the container which does the cleanup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Testcontainers randomly failed, stating that the container didn't start in spite of the fact that all Cassandra files were actually deleted.
The container probably ran so fast that it finished before Testcontainers noticed it.
Finally, we solved it by adding a short `sleep` in the container and executing an additional command in the container which does the cleanup.
```

> The final cleanup code using testcontainers looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final cleanup code using Testcontainers looks like this:
```

[source, xml]
----
@AfterClass
public static void tearDownClass() throws IOException, InterruptedException {
    destroyTestKeyspace();
    cassandra.stop();

    GenericContainer clenaup = new GenericContainer(new ImageFromDockerfile()
            .withDockerfileFromBuilder(builder -> builder
                    .from("eclipse-temurin:8-jre-focal")
                    .volume("/var/lib/cassandra")
                    .cmd("sleep", "10") // Give testcontainers some time to find out container is running.
                    .build()))
            .withFileSystemBind(cassandraDir, CASSANDRA_SERVER_DIR, BindMode.READ_WRITE);
    clenaup.start();
    clenaup.execInContainer(
            "rm", "-rf",
            CASSANDRA_SERVER_DIR + "/data",
            CASSANDRA_SERVER_DIR + "/cdc_raw_directory",
            CASSANDRA_SERVER_DIR + "/commitlog",
            CASSANDRA_SERVER_DIR + "/hints",
            CASSANDRA_SERVER_DIR + "/saved_caches");
    clenaup.stop();
}
----

> Once we solved the issue with Cassandra tests, we were mostly done and were ready to use Java 11/17.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once we solved the issue with Cassandra tests, we were mostly done and were ready to use Java 11 in the main Debezium code and Java 17 for our tests.
```

== Open issues

We need more battle testing to be sure that everything works well with Java 11/17.
Your help with testing and bug reports would be very valuable here and more than welcome.
Currently we are aware of one minor unsolved issue related to the Java update.

> Some IDEs cannot distinguish between `maven.compiler.release` and `maven.compiler.testRelease` (or it's not very clear to us who to set it up).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some IDEs cannot distinguish between `maven.compiler.release` and `maven.compiler.testRelease` (or it's not very clear to us how to set it up).
```

For example this test using https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/378[text block] is marked as an error in the IDE:

[.centered-image.responsive-image]
====
++++

> <img src="/assets/images/2022-04-22-switch-to-java-11/idea_error.png" style="max-width:90%;" class="responsive-image">

Reviewer: Why do we do the escaping in the text block? Not requiring that is they key reason for using them in the first place, right?

Author: ah, right

++++
Test using text block in Idea IDE.
====

> You can manually set Java level to 17, but in this case you may unintentionally use Java > 11 features in non-test code without IDE letting you know.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can manually set Java level to 17, but in this case you may unintentionally use Java > 11 features in non-test code without the IDE letting you know.
```

Worth pointing out that this is a nuisance but not a show stopper, as the next Maven build (latest on CI) would fail in that case.

> Moreover, e.g. Idea reset the code level upon any changes in the `pom.xml` files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, e.g. Idea resets the code level upon any changes in the `pom.xml` files.
```

---
layout: post
title:  Switching to Java 11/17
date:   2022-04-22 12:00:00 +0100
tags: [ community, news ]
author: vjuranek
---

> As you probably noticed, we started to work on Debezium 2.0.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you probably noticed, we have started work on Debezium 2.0.
```

> One of https://issues.redhat.com/browse/DBZ-3899[the planned changes] for the 2.0 release is https://issues.redhat.com/browse/DBZ-4949[the switch to Java 11 as a baseline].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One of https://issues.redhat.com/browse/DBZ-3899[the planned changes] for the 2.0 release is https://issues.redhat.com/browse/DBZ-4949[to switch to Java 11 as a baseline].
```

While some Java implementations still supports Java 8 
(e.g. OpenJDK will be https://access.redhat.com/articles/1299013[supported by Red Hat] till 2026), 

> free Oracle JDK 8 already https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/java-se-support-roadmap.html[reached end of life]. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
free Oracle JDK 8 already https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/java-se-support-roadmap.html[has reached end of life]. 
```

> So it's time to start thinking about using a more recent JDK and the new major Debezium release is a natural milestone when to do the switch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So it's time to start thinking about using a more recent JDK, and the new major Debezium release is a natural milestone when to do the switch.
```

+++<!-- more -->+++

Since early releases of Debezium 2.0, hopefully from the very first one `Alpha1`, Debezium bits will be compiled to Java 11 byte code.

> Therefore, you will have to use at least Java 11 to run Debezium.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore, Java 11 will be required to run Debezium in the next major update.
```

Also, if you use any of the Debezium bits in your project, you will have to switch to Java 11.

But wait, what does Java 11/17 in the title mean?
Is it there just to scare you or we are going to actually switch to Java 17?

<dramatic pause here>

No, we don't want to scare you.

> But are really going to switch to Java 17.
> However, only for the tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We are actually planning to switch to Java 17, but only for the test suite.
```

you just need to set following system properties:

[source, xml]
----
<maven.compiler.release>11</maven.compiler.release>
<maven.compiler.testRelease>17</maven.compiler.testRelease>
----

After switching to Java 11, checkstyle plugin and impsort plugin (plugin which takes care about proper order of imports) started to fail.
However, bumping their versions to the latest releases has solved all the issues.

This was the easy part.
The most difficult part was the Cassandra connector.

=== Cassandra connector

Cassandra connector now provides support for Cassandra 3 as well as for Cassandra 4.
Cassandra 4 https://cassandra.apache.org/doc/4.0/cassandra/new/java11.html[works with Java 11], 
but running Cassandra 3 with Java 11 is not possible (or at least requires some hacking).
Current test implementation doesn't run Cassandra in a container as we do in tests for other DB connectors, but runs Cassandra in embedded mode.
Therefore if you want to run the tests with Java 11 (or 17), tests for Cassandra 3 module would fail.
Obvious solution is to run Cassandra in a container with Java 8.
This sounds good, but this approach has one pitfall.

> Cassandra connector needs access to Cassandra log files as it reads the dedicated log file to obtain CDC events.
> So the tests need to access Cassandra files in the container.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Cassandra connector needs access to Cassandra log files as it reads the dedicated log file to obtain CDC events, so the tests need to access Cassandra files in the container.
```

> This is still quite easily solvable by creating a temporary directory in e.g. `target` directory, giving it access to all users and bind-mounting it to the container.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can be solved quite easily using a temporary directory, .one in e.g `target`, giving access to all users and moutable within the container.
```

Cassandra running in the container can later on use this mounted volume for storing its data.
The real issue starts when you try to do the cleanup after the tests.
As Cassandra runs under dedicated user `cassandra` in the container, which is very likely not present on the test machine (or with different UID/GID), 
cleanup fails when it tries to delete the temporary directory with Cassandra files.
These files were created by a different user with insufficient rights for other users to delete them.
Trying to delete them from Cassandra's container on Cassandra exit in some wrapper script turned out to be quite cumbersome and not very reliable.

> The most promising solution seemed to be to start another container with the same `cassandra` user after Cassandra container is stopped,
> bind-mount same directory there and delete all the files from this container.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The most promising solution proved to involve starting a second container with the same `cassandra` user with access to the mounted volume and cleaning up the files after the first Cassandra container had already stopped.
```

We considered two option for running containers:

* https://dmp.fabric8.io/[Fabric8 Docker Maven plugin]
* https://www.testcontainers.org/[Testcontainers]

We use the Fabric8 plugin in the rest of the project, which suggests to use it also in this case to have uniformity across the project.
On the other hand, using testcontainers would make tests more convenient for the developers (who actually use tests after all!),
as it allows to run the tests directly from IDE without starting the container manually.
In the end, the decision was driven by the fact that running a cleanup container is not possible with the Fabric8 plugin.
Maven doesn't allow to execute different configurations in the same phase 
and therefore it's not possible to stop the Cassandra container in the `post-integration-test` phase and at the same time run cleanup container in this phase.

> Testcontainers allow starting and stopping containers programmatically when needed.
> It also allows to define the images directly in the code, so we don't need any additional `Dockerfile`
> and cleanup container is just an implementation detail hidden in the test itself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Testcontainers allow starting and stopping containers programmatically when needed, 
allows defining the images directly in code so we don't need any additional `Dockerfile`
, and cleaning up the container is just an implementation detail hidden in the test itself.
```

Having the ability to run the tests directly from the IDE is a nice benefit on top of these things.

The only tricky thing when using testcontainers was that when we tried to remove the files using Docker `cmd` command,

> testcontainers randomly filed, stating that the container didn't start in spite of the fact that all Cassandra files were actually deleted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
testcontainers randomly failed, stating that the container didn't start in spite of the fact that all Cassandra files were actually deleted.
```

The container probably ran so fast that it finished before testcontainers noticed it.

> Finally we solved it by running short `sleep` in the container and executing an additional command in the container which does the cleanup.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, we solved it by adding a short `sleep` in the container and executing an additional command in the container which does the cleanup.
```
